2012 MBTA Fare Policy

1. Purpose

The purpose of this Fare Policy is to establish guidelines for setting or restructuring
MBTA fares. MBTA staff and the Board of Directors will look to this policy when they
make decisions about adjusting fares. All such decisions will also be made in accordance
with the MBTA’s enabling legislation (MGL c. 161A), speciﬁcally § S(r), which directs
the MBTA to adopt a fare policy that addresses the following:

A fare structure, including fare media and passes1
Fare levels, including discounts

A system for free or substantially price-reduced transfer privileges
Fare equity.

ll. Fare Policy Goal

The goal of this Fare Policy is to support the MBTA’s mission of providing high-quality

public transportation services for the beneﬁt of the individuals and communities that it
serves.

Fare Policy Objectives

The MBTA, in consultation with the Rider Oversight Committee, has developed six
Fare Policy Objectives that are critical to achieving the Fare Policy Goal. The nature
of these objectives reﬂects the complexity of developing a Fare Structure that will
balance the desire to keep fares affordable for MBTA customers with the need to
maximize fare revenue to help maintain and expand transit operations. These
objectives were used to develop the Fare Structure described later in the policy.

In the future, when changes to the Fare Structure are considered, strategies for
meeting the six objectives will be developed and evaluated. The new Fare Structure
that emerges will encompass the mix of strategies that are determined to best meet the

F are Policy Objectives, as described below, in the context of the conditions and needs
at that time.

1. Customer- and Community-Related Objectives

The following three objectives directly support the MBTA’s mission of operating
high-quality public transportation services. When a fare increase or restructuring
is proposed, all fare strategies considered for achieving these three objectives
should be carefully weighed in relation to each other, as some possible strategies

may achieve one objective at the expense of another. The MBTA must strive to
meet all of these objectives.

1 For the purposes of this policy, “fare structure” encompasses all four of the fare requirements found in
MGL, c. 161A § 5(r).

Page 1 Effective July 1, 2012

